A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
6
Jalil told her the story of Queen Gauhar Shad, who had raised the famous minarets as her
loving ode to Herat back in the fifteenth century. He described to her the green wheat fields
of Herat, the orchards, the vines pregnant with plump grapes, the city's crowded, vaulted
bazaars.
"There is a pistachio tree," Jalil said one day, "and beneath it, Mariam jo, is buried none
other than the great poet Jami." He leaned in and whispered, "Jami lived over five hundred
years ago. He did. I took you there once, to the tree. You were little. You wouldn't
remember."
It was true. Mariam didn't remember. And though she would live the first fifteen years of
her life within walking distance of Herat, Mariam would never see this storied tree. She
would never see the famous minarets up close, and she would never pick fruit from Herat's
orchards or stroll in its fields of wheat. But whenever Jalil talked like this, Mariam would
listen with enchantment. She would admire Jalil for his vast and worldly knowledge. She
would quiver with pride to have a father who knew such things.
"What rich lies!" Nana said after Jalil left. "Rich man telling rich lies. He never took you
to any tree. And don't let him charm you. He betrayed us, your beloved father. He cast us
out. He cast us out of his big fancy house like we were nothing to him. He did it happily."
Mariam would listen dutifully to this. She never dared say to Nana how much she disliked
her talking this way about Jalil. The truth was that around Jalil, Mariam did not feel at all
like a harami. For an hour or two every Thursday, when Jalil came to see her, all smiles
and gifts and endearments, Mariam felt deserving of all the beauty and bounty that life had
to give. And, for this, Mariam loved Jalil.
* * *
Even if she had to share him.
Jalil had three wives and nine children, nine legitimate children, all of whom were
strangers to Mariam. He was one of Herat's wealthiest men. He owned a cinema, which
Mariam had never seen, but at her insistence Jalil had described it to her, and so she knew
that the fa9ade was made of blue-and-tan terra-cotta tiles, that it had private balcony seats
and a trellised ceiling. Double swinging doors opened into a tiled lobby, where posters of
Hindi films were encased in glass displays. On Tuesdays, Jalil said one day, kids got free
ice cream at the concession stand
Nana smiled demurely when he said this. She waited until he had left the kolba, before
snickering and saying, "The children of strangers get ice cream. What do you get, Mariam?
Stories of ice cream."
In addition to the cinema, Jalil owned land in Karokh, land in Farah, three carpet stores, a
clothing shop, and a black 1956 Buick Roadmaster. He was one of Herat's best-connected
men, friend of the mayor and the provincial governor. He had a cook, a driver, and three
housekeepers.
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
7
Nana had been one of the housekeepers. Until her belly began to swell.
When that happened, Nana said, the collective gasp of Jalil's family sucked the air out of
Herat. His in laws swore blood would flow. The wives demanded that he throw her out.
Nana's own father, who was a lowly stone carver in the nearby village of Gul Daman,
disowned her. Disgraced, he packed his things and boarded a bus to Bran, never to be seen
or heard from again.
"Sometimes," Nana said early one morning, as she was feeding the chickens outside the
kolba, "I wish my father had had the stomach to sharpen one of his knives and do the
honorable thing. It might have been better for me." She tossed another handful of seeds into
the coop, paused, and looked at Mariam. "Better for you too, maybe. It would have spared
you the grief of knowing that you are what you are. But he was a coward, my father. He
didn't have the dil, the heart, for it."
Jalil didn't have the dil either, Nana said, to do the honorable thing. To stand up to his
family, to his wives and in-laws, and accept responsibility for what he had done. Instead,
behind closed doors, a face saving deal had quickly been struck. The next day, he had made
her gather her few things from the servants' quarters, where she'd been living, and sent her
off.
"You know what he told his wives by way of defense? That I forced myself on him. That
it was my fault. Didi? You see? This is what it means to be a woman in this world."
Nana put down the bowl of chicken feed. She lifted Mariam's chin with a finger.
"Look at me, Mariam."
Reluctantly, Mariam did.
Nana said, "Learn this now and learn it well, my daughter: Like a compass needle that
points north, a man's accusing finger always finds a woman. Always. You remember that,
Mariam."
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
8
2.
o Jalil and his wives, I was a pokeroot. A mugwort. You too. And you weren't even
born yet."
"What's a mugwort?" Mariam asked
"A weed," Nana said. "Something you rip out and toss aside."
Mariam frowned internally. Jalil didn't treat her as a weed. He never had. But Mariam
thought it wise to suppress this protest.
"Unlike weeds, I had to be replanted, you see, given food and water. On account of you.
That was the deal Jalil made with his family."
Nana said she had refused to live in Herat.
"For what? To watch him drive his kinchini wives around town all day?"
She said she wouldn't live in her father's empty house either, in the village of Gul Daman,
which sat on a steep hill two kilometers north of Herat. She said she wanted to live
somewhere removed, detached, where neighbors wouldn't stare at her belly, point at her,
snicker, or, worse yet, assault her with insincere kindnesses.
"And, believe me," Nana said, "it was a relief to your father having me out of sight. It
suited him just fine."
It was Muhsin, Jalil's eldest son by his first wife, Khadija, who suggested the clearing. It
was on the outskirts of Gul Daman. To get to it, one took a rutted, uphill dirt track that
branched off the main road between Herat and Gul Daman. The track was flanked on either
side by knee high grass and speckles of white and bright yellow flowers. The track snaked
uphill and led to a flat field where poplars and cottonwoods soared and wild bushes grew in
clusters. From up there, one could make out the tips of the rusted blades of Gul Daman's
windmill, on the left, and, on the right, all of Herat spread below. The path ended
perpendicular to a wide, trout-filled stream, which rolled down from the Safid-koh
mountains surrounding Gul Daman. Two hundred yards upstream, toward the mountains,
there was a circular grove of weeping willow trees. In the center, in the shade of the
willows, was the clearing.
Jalil went there to have a look. When he came back, Nana said, he sounded like a warden
bragging about the clean walls and shiny floors of his prison.
"And so, your father built us this rathole."
* * *
Nana had almost married once, when she was fifteen. The suitor had been a boy from
Shindand, a young parakeet seller. Mariam knew the story from Nana herself, and, though
T
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
9
Nana dismissed the episode, Mariam could tell by the wistful light in her eyes that she had
been happy. Perhaps for the only time in her life, during those days leading up to her
wedding, Nana had been genuinely happy.
As Nana told the story, Mariam sat on her lap and pictured her mother being fitted for a
wedding dress. She imagined her on horseback, smiling shyly behind a veiled green gown,
her palms painted red with henna, her hair parted with silver dust, the braids held together
by tree sap. She saw musicians blowing the shahnai flute and banging on dohol drums,
street children hooting and giving chase.
Then, a week before the wedding date, a jinn had entered Nana's body. This required no
description to Mariam. She had witnessed it enough times with her own eyes: Nana
collapsing suddenly, her body tightening, becoming rigid, her eyes rolling back, her arms
and legs shaking as if something were throttling her from the inside, the froth at the corners
of her mouth, white, sometimes pink with blood. Then the drowsiness, the frightening
disorientation, the incoherent mumbling.
When the news reached Shindand, the parakeet seller's family called off the wedding.
"They got spooked" was how Nana put it.
The wedding dress was stashed away. After that, there were no more suitors.
* * *
In the clearing, Jalil and two of his sons, Farhad and Muhsin, built the small kolba where
Mariam would live the first fifteen years of her life. They raised it with sun dried bricks and
plastered it with mud and handfuls of straw. It had two sleeping cots, a wooden table, two
straight backed chairs, a window, and shelves nailed to the walls where Nana placed clay
pots and her beloved Chinese tea set. Jalil put in a new cast iron stove for the winter and
stacked logs of chopped wood behind the kolba He added a tandoor outside for making
bread and a chicken coop with a fence around it. He brought a few sheep, built them a
feeding trough. He had Farhad and Muhsin dig a deep hole a hundred yards outside the
circle of willows and built an outhouse over it.
Jalil could have hired laborers to build the kolba. Nana said, but he didn't.
"His idea of penance."
* * *
In Nana's account of the day that she gave birth to Mariam, no one came to help. It
happened on a damp, overcast day in the spring of 1959, she said, the twenty sixth year of
King Zahir Shah's mostly uneventful forty year reign. She said that Jalil hadn't bothered to
summon a doctor, or even a midwife, even though he knew that the jinn might enter her
body and cause her to have one of her fits in the act of delivering. She lay all alone on the
kolba's floor, a knife by her side, sweat drenching her body.
"When the pain got bad, I'd bite on a pillow and scream into it until I was hoarse. And still
no one came to wipe my face or give me a drink of water. And you, Mariam jo, you were in
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
10
no rush. Almost two days you made me lay on that cold, hard floor. I didn't eat or sleep, all
I did was push and pray that you would come out."
"I'm sorry, Nana."
"I cut the cord between us myself. That's why I had a knife."
"I'm sorry."
Nana always gave a slow, burdened smile here, one of lingering recrimination or reluctant
forgiveness, Mariam could never tell It did not occur to young Mariam to ponder the
unfairness of apologizing for the manner of her own birth.
By the time it did occur to her, around the time she turned ten, Mariam no longer believed
this story of her birth. She believed Jalil’s version, that though he'd been away he'd
arranged for Nana to be taken to a hospital in Herat where she had been tended to by a
doctor. She had lain on a clean, proper bed in a well lit room. Jalil shook his head with
sadness when Mariam told him about the knife.
Mariam also came to doubt that she had made her mother suffer for two full days.
"They told me it was all over within under an hour," Jalil said. "You were a good daughter,
Mariam jo. Even in birth you were a good daughter."
"He wasn't even there!" Nana spat. "He was in Takht-e-Safar, horseback riding with his
precious friends."
When they informed him that he had a new daughter, Nana said, Jalil had shrugged, kept
brushing his horse's mane, and stayed in Takht-e-Safar another two weeks.
"The truth is, he didn't even hold you until you were a month old. And then only to look
down once, comment on your longish face, and hand you back to me."
Mariam came to disbelieve this part of the story as well. Yes, Jalil admitted, he had been
horseback riding in Takht-e-Safar, but, when they gave him the news, he had not shrugged.
He had hopped on the saddle and ridden back to Herat. He had bounced her in his arms, run
his thumb over her flaky eyebrows, and hummed a lullaby. Mariam did not picture Jalil
saying that her face was long, though it was true that it was long.
Nana said she was the one who'd picked the name Mariam because it had been the name
of her mother. Jalil said he chose the name because Mariam, the tuberose, was a lovely
flower.
"Your favorite?" Mariam asked.
"Well, one of," he said and smiled.
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
11
3.
ne of Mariam's earliest memories was the sound of a wheelbarrow's squeaky iron
wheels bouncing over rocks. The wheelbarrow came once a month, filled with rice,
flour, tea, sugar, cooking oil, soap, toothpaste. It was pushed by two of Mariam's half
brothers, usually Muhsin and Ramin, sometimes Ramin and Farhad. Up the dirt track, over
rocks and pebbles, around holes and bushes, the boys took turns pushing until they reached
the stream. There, the wheelbarrow had to be emptied and the items hand carried across the
water. Then the boys would transfer the wheelbarrow across the stream and load it up again.
Another two hundred yards of pushing followed, this time through tall, dense grass and
around thickets of shrubs. Frogs leaped out of their way. The brothers waved mosquitoes
from their sweaty faces.
"He has servants," Mariam said. "He could send a servant."
"His idea of penance," Nana said.
The sound of the wheelbarrow drew Mariam and Nana outside. Mariam would always
remember Nana the way she looked on Ration Day: a tall, bony, barefoot woman leaning in
the doorway, her lazy eye narrowed to a slit, arms crossed in a defiant and mocking way.
Her short cropped, sunlit hair would be uncovered and uncombed. She would wear an ill
fitting gray shirt buttoned to the throat. The pockets were filled with walnut sized rocks.
The boys sat by the stream and waited as Mariam and Nana transferred the rations to the
kolba They knew better than to get any closer than thirty yards, even though Nana's aim
was poor and most of the rocks landed well short of their targets. Nana yelled at the boys as
she carried bags of rice inside, and called them names Mariam didn't understand. She
cursed their mothers, made hateful faces at them. The boys never returned the insults.
Mariam felt sorry for the boys. How tired their arms and legs must be, she thought
pityingly, pushing that heavy load. She wished she were allowed to offer them water. But
she said nothing, and if they waved at her she didn't wave back. Once, to please Nana,
Mariam even yelled at Muhsin, told him he had a mouth shaped like a lizard's ass and was
consumed later with guilt, shame, and fear that they would tell Jalil. Nana, though, laughed
so hard, her rotting front tooth in full display, that Mariam thought she would lapse into one
of her fits. She looked at Mariam when she was done and said, "You're a good daughter."
When the barrow was empty, the boys scuffled back and pushed it away. Mariam would
wait and watch them disappear into the tall grass and flowering weeds.
"Are you coming?"
"Yes, Nana."
"They laugh at you. They do. I hear them."
"I'm coming."
"You don't believe me?"
O
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
12
"Here I am."
"You know I love you, Mariam jo."
* * *
In the mornings, they awoke to the distant bleating of sheep and the high pitched toot of a
flute as Gul Daman's shepherds led their flock to graze on the grassy hillside. Mariam and
Nana milked the goats, fed the hens, and collected eggs. They made bread together. Nana
showed her how to knead dough, how to kindle the tandoor and slap the flattened dough
onto its inner walls. Nana taught her to sew too, and to cook rice and all the different
toppings: shalqam stew with turnip, spinach sabzi, cauliflower with ginger.
Nana made no secret of her dislike for visitors and, in fact, people in general but she made
exceptions for a select few. And so there was Gul Daman's leader, the village arbab, Habib
Khan, a small headed, bearded man with a large belly who came by once a month or so,
tailed by a servant, who carried a chicken, sometimes a pot of kichiri rice, or a basket of
dyed eggs, for Mariam.
Then there was a rotund, old woman that Nana called Bibi jo, whose late husband had
been a stone carver and friends with Nana's father. Bibi jo was invariably accompanied by
one of her six brides and a grandchild or two. She limped and huffed her way across the
clearing and made a great show of rubbing her hip and lowering herself, with a pained sigh,
onto the chair that Nana pulled up for her. Bibi jo too always brought Mariam something, a
box of dishlemeh candy, a basket of quinces. For Nana, she first brought complaints about
her failing health, and then gossip from Herat and Gul Daman, delivered at length and with
gusto, as her daughter-in-law sat listening quietly and dutifully behind her.
But Mariam's favorite, other than Jalil of course, was Mullah Faizullah, the elderly village
Koran tutor, its akhund He came by once or twice a week from Gul Daman to teach
Mariam the five daily namaz prayers and tutor her in Koran recitation, just as he had taught
Nana when she'd been a little girl It was Mullah Faizullah who had taught Mariam to read,
who had patiently looked over her shoulder as her lips worked the words soundlessly, her
index finger lingering beneath each word, pressing until the nail bed went white, as though
she could squeeze the meaning out of the symbols. It was Mullah Faizullah who had held
her hand, guided the pencil in it along the rise of each alef, the curve of each beh, the three
dots of each seh.
He was a gaunt, stooping old man with a toothless smile and a white beard that dropped to
his navel. Usually, he came alone to the kolba, though sometimes with his russet haired son
Hamza, who was a few years older than Mariam. When he showed up at the kolba, Mariam
kissed Mullah Faizullah's hand-which felt like kissing a set of twigs covered with a thin
layer of skin-and he kissed the top of her brow before they sat inside for the day's lesson.
After, the two of them sat outside the kolba, ate pine nuts and sipped green tea, watched the
bulbul birds darting from tree to tree. Sometimes they went for walks among the bronze
fallen leaves and alder bushes, along the stream and toward the mountains. Mullah
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
13
Faizullah twirled the beads of his tasbeh rosary as they strolled, and, in his quivering voice,
told Mariam stories of all the things he'd seen in his youth, like the two headed snake he'd
found in Iran, on Isfahan's Thirty three Arch Bridge, or the watermelon he had split once
outside the Blue Mosque in Mazar, to find the seeds forming the words Allah on one half,
Akbar on the other.
Mullah Faizullah admitted to Mariam that, at times, he did not understand the meaning of
the Koran's words. But he said he liked the enchanting sounds the Arabic words made as
they rolled off his tongue. He said they comforted him, eased his heart.
"They'll comfort you too, Mariam jo," he said. "You can summon them in your time of
need, and they won't fail you. God's words will never betray you, my girl"
Mullah Faizullah listened to stories as well as he told them. When Mariam spoke, his
attention never wavered He nodded slowly and smiled with a look of gratitude, as if he had
been granted a coveted privilege. It was easy to tell Mullah Faizullah things that Mariam
didn't dare tell Nana.
One day, as they were walking, Mariam told him that she wished she would be allowed to
go to school.
"I mean a real school, akhund sahib. Like in a classroom. Like my father's other kids."
Mullah Faizullah stopped.
The week before, Bibi jo had brought news that Jalil's daughters Saideh and Naheed were
going to the Mehri School for girls in Herat. Since then, thoughts of classrooms and
teachers had rattled around Mariam's head, images of notebooks with lined pages, columns
of numbers, and pens that made dark, heavy marks. She pictured herself in a classroom
with other girls her age. Mariam longed to place a ruler on a page and draw important
looking lines.
"Is that what you want?" Mullah Faizullah said, looking at her with his soft, watery eyes,
his hands behind his stooping back, the shadow of his turban falling on a patch of bristling
buttercups.
"Yes. "
"And you want me to ask your mother for permission."
Mariam smiled. Other than Jalil, she thought there was no one in the world who
understood her better than her old tutor.
"Then what can I do? God, in His wisdom, has given us each weaknesses, and foremost
among my many is that I am powerless to refuse you, Mariam jo," he said, tapping her
cheek with one arthritic finger.
But later, when he broached Nana, she dropped the knife with which she was slicing
onions. "What for?"
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
14
"If the girl wants to learn, let her, my dear. Let the girl have an education."
"Learn? Learn what, Mullah sahib?" Nana said sharply. "What is there to learn?"
She snapped her eyes toward Mariam.
Mariam looked down at her hands.
"What's the sense schooling a girl like you? It's like shining a spittoon. And you'll learn
nothing of value in those schools. There is only one, only one skill a woman like you and
me needs in life, and they don't teach it in school. Look at me."
"You should not speak like this to her, my child," Mullah Faizullah said.
"Look at me."
Mariam did.
"Only one skill And it's this: tahamul. Endure."
"Endure what, Nana?"
"Oh, don't you fret about that, " Nana said. "There won't be any shortage of things."
She went on to say how Mil's wives had called her an ugly, lowly stone carver's daughter.
How they'd made her wash laundry outside in the cold until her face went numb and her
fingertips burned.
"It's our lot in life, Mariam. Women like us. We endure. It's all we have. Do you
understand? Besides, they'll laugh at you in school. They will. They'll call you harami.
They'll say the most terrible things about you. I won't have it."
Mariam nodded.
"And no more talk about school. You're all I have. I won't lose you to them. Look
at me. No more talk about school."
"Be reasonable Come now. If the girl wants " Mullah Faizullah began.
"And you, akhund sahib, with all due respect, you should know better than to encourage
these foolish ideas of hers. If you really care about her, then you make her see that she
belongs here at home with her mother. There is nothing out there for her. Nothing but
rejection and heartache. I know, akhund sahib. I know. "
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
15
4.
ariam loved having visitors at the kolba. The villagearbab and his gifts, Bibi jo and
her aching hip and endless gossiping, and, of course, Mullah Faizullah. But there was
no one, no one, that Mariam longed to see more than Jalil.
The anxiety set in on Tuesday nights. Mariam would sleep poorly, fretting that some
business entanglement would prevent Jalil from coming on Thursday, that she would have
to wait a whole other week to see him. On Wednesdays, she paced outside, around the
kolba, tossed chicken feed absentmindedly into the coop. She went for aimless walks,
picking petals from flowers and batting at the mosquitoes nibbling on her arms. Finally, on
Thursdays, all she could do was sit against a wall, eyes glued to the stream, and wait. If
Jalil was running late, a terrible dread filled her bit by bit. Her knees would weaken, and
she would have to go somewhere and lie down.
Then Nana would call, "And there he is, your father. In all his glory."
Mariam would leap to her feet when she spotted him hopping stones across the stream, all
smiles and hearty waves. Mariam knew that Nana was watching her, gauging her reaction,
and it always took effort to stay in the doorway, to wait, to watch him slowly make his way
to her, to not run to him. She restrained herself, patiently watched him walk through the tall
grass, his suit jacket slung over his shoulder, the breeze lifting his red necktie.
When Jalil entered the clearing, he would throw his jacket on the tandoor and open his
arms. Mariam would walk, then finally run, to him, and he would catch her under the arms
and toss her up high. Mariam would squeal.
Suspended in the air, Mariam would see Jalil's upturned face below her, his wide, crooked
smile, his widow's peak, his cleft chin a perfect pocket for the tip of her pinkie his teeth, the
whitest in a town of rotting molars. She liked his trimmed mustache, and she liked that no
matter the weather he always wore a suit on his visits dark brown, his favorite color, with
the white triangle of a handkerchief in the breast pocket and cuff links too, and a tie,
usually red, which he left loosened Mariam could see herself too, reflected in the brown of
Jalil's eyes: her hair billowing, her face blazing with excitement, the sky behind her.
Nana said that one of these days he would miss, that she, Mariam, would slip through his
fingers, hit the ground, and break a bone. But Mariam did not believe that Jalil would drop
her. She believed that she would always land safely into her father's clean, well manicured
hands.
They sat outside the kolba, in the shade, and Nana served them tea. Jalil and she
acknowledged each other with an uneasy smile and a nod. Jalil never brought up Nana's
rock throwing or her cursing.
Despite her rants against him when he wasn't around, Nana was subdued and mannerly
when Jalil visited. Her hair was always washed. She brushed her teeth, wore her best hijab
for him. She sat quietly on a chair across from him, hands folded on her lap. She did not
M
Are you listening?"
"I am."
He saw her looking at the bulge in his coat's side pocket. "Ah. Of course. Well. Here, then.
Without further ado..."
He fished a small box from his pocket and gave it to her. He did this from time to time,
bring her small presents. A carnelian bracelet cuff one time, a choker with lapis lazuli beads
another. That day, Mariam opened the box and found a leaf shaped pendant, tiny coins
etched with moons and stars hanging from it.
"Try it on, Mariam jo."
She did. "What do you think?"
Jalil beamed "I think you look like a queen."
After he left, Nana saw the pendant around Mariam's neck.
"Nomad jewelry," she said. "I've seen them make it. They melt the coins people throw at
them and make jewelry. Let's see him bring you gold next time, your precious father. Let's
see him."
When it was time for Jalil to leave, Mariam always stood in the doorway and watched him
exit the clearing, deflated at the thought of the week that stood, like an immense,
immovable object, between her and his next visit. Mariam always held her breath as she
watched him go. She held her breath and, in her head, counted seconds. She pretended that
for each second that she didn't breathe, God would grant her another day with Jalil.
At night, Mariam lay in her cot and wondered what his house in Herat was like. She
wondered what it would be like to live with him, to see him every day. She pictured herself
handing him a towel as he shaved, telling him when he nicked himself. She would brew tea
for him. She would sew on his missing buttons. They would take walks in Herat together,
in the vaulted bazaar where Jalil said you could find anything you wanted. They would ride
in his car, and people would point and say, "There goes Jalil Khan with his daughter." He
would show her the famed tree that had a poet buried beneath it.
One day soon, Mariam decided, she would tell Jalil these things. And when he heard,
when he saw how much she missed him when he was gone, he would surely take her with
him. He would bring her to Herat, to live in his house, just like his other children.
A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
18
5.
know what I want," Mariam said to Jalil.
It was the spring of 1974, the year Mariam turned fifteen. The three of them were sitting
outside the kolba, in a patch of shade thrown by the willows, on folding chairs arranged in 
